I wonder if people drive by.
By and they're like, oh
my God, it's Melinda.
No.
I think they just drive and go.
What's going on?
Melinda French Gates is
opening up like never before.
Your book is about transitions,
about turning points.
Do you feel like you've gone through
it now that you've crossed the chasm?
I feel like I'm still in transition. I
mean, I really am, and quite frankly,
I hope my whole life I embrace change.
A billionaire, philanthropist, and.
Investor.
Please welcome back to
the Late Show, Melinda.
French Gates. Melinda's been a champion
for gender equality, education,
health and human rights around the globe.
Whether it's health, whether
it's decision-making,
whether it's economic opportunity,
we won't get there as a world if we don't
make the right investments in women.
I've always believed that
to whom much is given,
much is expected.
Melinda is one of the
world's most powerful women,
but she's learned that no amount of
money or power protects you from the
unexpected twists and turns of
life. Since the mid nineties,
she's been known as a driving force of
the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation,
often defined by her marriage to
the man behind the Microsoft empire,
but now she's stepping
into a new spotlight,
carving a path that's unmistakably
and unapologetically her own.
I wanted to get a sense of the
Melinda behind the headlines,
the Melinda before the Gates and travel
with her to a special place in Seattle
where it all began.
When she was just Melinda French
starting a new job at this little
company called Microsoft.
This is the neighborhood where you
bought your first house. It is.
Does this bring back memories?
It does. It definitely does.
I loved living over here
on this side of the lake.
And you bought this house with
your own money from Microsoft.
Stock. Absolutely.
Which I'm guessing was a big
deal for a single gal back then.
It was, it felt very independent
to do it, and I was so excited.
Very grown up. What did Catholic
school girl, Melinda, from Dallas,
think about you just striking
out on your own in Seattle?
I was exhilarated by the whole thing.
Your dad was part of the Apollo missions.
He told you to learn how to code.
What was it about the tech
industry that hooked you?
Well, I always loved math.
I was a math nerd coming out of
seventh and eighth grade and my female
math teacher in high school,
she brought these computers into
the school about five Apple Twos,
and it was just kind of the
adventure programming was like,
it was both creative,
but it was a logic problem and I like
logic problems. My dad bought us a
computer at home, and so we
were not only programming,
but we were also keeping the books for
my parents for the real estate business,
so I also learned the flows of money.
After graduating as high school
valedictorian, she went on to Duke,
earning both a BA in
computer science and an MBA.
In 1987, Melinda moved to
Seattle to join Microsoft.
The company was pioneering the software
revolution. It had just gone public,
was releasing groundbreaking systems
like Windows 2.0 and Excel and Melinda
began rising through the ranks. What
was the culture of Microsoft back then?
For better or for worse, I want to know.
There were some odd characters including
one developer who drummed his way
with drumsticks around his
office, and I thought, well,
there were some odd characters in
computer science at Duke and that's okay.
Yeah,
there weren't very many women and in
particular there weren't that many
technical women. It was
like a boys debate club.
You'd go into the meetings and you had
to have your points and know what you
were going to say and be ready
on your toes and think fast,
and I learned to play that game,
but it could be wearing over time.
You met Bill shortly after
you joined Microsoft?
I did.
Did you have any idea how dramatically
your life was about to change?
No. No, no, no.
Because I was dating him and I was
dating a few other people and I had a
large group of friends outside
of work and with those friends,
I would go off to coffee
houses or we'd go to films.
We would go hiking on the Olympic
Peninsula on the weekends.
I didn't know that things over
time we'd become serious with Bill.
When did you realize, oh my gosh, my
life is never going to be the same?
We dated quite a lot. We'd
broken up a few times,
but I do know on the day
I got engaged, I was like,
whoa, what have I bitten off here?
Melinda went from the anonymity of being
an independent career woman to a life
in the spotlight, married to the
world's most famous tech scion.
She stayed on at Microsoft through the
iconic Windows 95 launch and had a hand
in a little known project that was,
let's just say ahead of its time.
When you worked at Microsoft, you had
this project called Microsoft Bob. Yes,
A complete failure. I mean,
some of those early concepts in Bob
are actually starting to come to
fruition now.
So the thing that people always like
to make fun of is Clippy Clippy. Yes.
Oh yes. Oh, you remember Clippy? Yes.
Clippy actually was one of the early
agents that came up in publisher and
then Bob.
The idea of an agent was really there.
In spite of its failure, today,
Bob is seen as a prelude to
AI assistance like ChatGPT.
Belinda also played a part in some of
Microsoft's greatest early successes like
Word and Expedia. But two years
after her marriage to Bill,
Melinda left the company to focus on
raising their children. Daughter Jennifer,
followed by son Rory and
their youngest Phoebe.
What did you do to try
to keep things normal?
I made sure my kids went to the local
schools here they have to deal with which
kids are sincere, which
kids aren't sincere,
who puts on a show because it's my kids.
I went through the years of navigating
the flip phone and later the smartphone
and working with other parents or if
there were disciplinary problems or if my
kids got in trouble,
so I just tried to keep life
for them as normal as we could.
What was never normal? Never normal.
Having a trampoline room inside your
house. I've actually been in there.
That's a pretty cool
room. Phoebe, my youngest,
her big thing was she used to try to get
any adult she could get at a cocktail
party to go on the trampoline.
You had this power career
risen up in management.
What was the transition like to
leave work and be a mom full-time and
let that go?
Really,
that had a lot to do with Bill was the
CEO and traveling all over the world and
to have the family life we wanted to
have. I felt like I wanted to be home,
but it was really hard on me,
so much harder than I expected.
I have this new little
baby who I adore and love,
but I don't have my career anymore.
I'm not around all these hard
charging people, intellectual topics.
So much of the world defined
you not based on who you are,
but who you were married to.
Did the pressure on Bill or
Microsoft and you ever make you feel
alone or stuck?
Well, I didn't define
myself that way. Good,
so I knew how I was all along, so I think
there were times I felt pressure,
but I could turn to my friends and
they would remind me, no, no, no, no,
you got this. You're smart
enough to figure this out.
So I had to learn over time
how to rebuild that for myself
through my friendships and also start
doing some board work so I could stay
engaged.
She did more than just stay engaged.
Melinda helped revolutionize philanthropy.
She took the reins of their foundation
with plans to put billions of dollars
back into the world.
They began funding solutions to some of
the world's most pressing problems like
education, vaccines,
maternal and child health.
In 2010,
the couple joined forces with Warren
Buffett to create the Giving Pledge.
You're seeing more and
more people come forward.
We have 40 other couples signed up in the
United States who have pledged to give
away over 50% of their
wealth. That's huge.
I don't believe in spending money that
doesn't do anything for me when it will
do something for somebody else.
Some people think it's inspiring, but
it's all talk. There's no accountability.
Are you tracking it and is it working?
We are tracking it to the extent we can,
but what I do know is that a lot of the
philanthropists have learned from one
another and they'll get inspired by
another philanthropist and then get going.
For three decades,
Bill and Melinda Gates built their
empire of growing and giving,
but not without some damaging headlines.
There were reports of questionable
investments and programs,
Bill's association with Jeffrey Epstein,
and allegations of marital infidelity.
What was it that made you ultimately say,
I need to get out of this marriage?
Yeah. The details about that will
remain between Bill and me and our kids.
That was a very painful
time for all five of us,
and I think it deserves privacy.
As many people who've
gone through divorce note,
it's rarely one thing that happens.
It's a series of things over time.
He said that the dissolution of
your marriage is his biggest regret.
What was your reaction to that?
It is sad that the behavior that
happened led to the dissolution of our
marriage.
It was the behavior and you
have to change your behavior to
be able to be in a trusting,
intimate relationship,
and if that can't happen over time
and you've given many chances,
then there are consequences. Right.
What about you? Did you let go
of any dreams along the way?
Sure. The day I got married,
I dreamt I was going to be married
for my whole life. That is not,
that's not something you let go of easily.
So I had to really think and
feel through that decision,
but the thing that I knew and that some
people could hold out perspective for me
is I was going to be
happier on the other side.
Initially, Melinda stayed
on at the foundation,
but after finalizing the divorce decided
it was time to close that chapter
too. A year later, Bill announced
that over the next 20 years,
the foundation will distribute
almost all of his wealth,
more than $200 billion and close up shop.
Melinda is continuing her
philanthropy on her own,
putting 12 and a half billion dollars
to work through Pivotal Ventures,
her investment and advocacy organization.
So this is my office.
So tell me what we got going on here.
Just all kinds of things. A
woman gave me this in Malawi.
I was just down in Louisiana
last week and it was Mardi Gras.
We were actually learning
about maternal mortality. Gosh,
and the organization gave me these.
So what do you need to feel
focused? Tell me about your routine.
Well,
you might be surprised that I
definitely read email on my computer,
but I actually prefer to
have a lot of things printed.
I can focus more if it's printed.
Hang on. Sorry.
Boss lady.
I love that. Okay, so my
daughter, Phoebe, my youngest,
one of her female girlfriends gave me
this senior year of high school when she
graduated high school. She's like,
you've been my mentor in life,
and you're just like the ultimate boss
lady. I was like, is that a good thing?
I hope so. You're making
all of these bets,
these gifts, doing all
this research on your own.
What are you seeing that you can do
differently given your social capital and
your economic power?
Well, I'm using every tool in my
toolbox, whether that's advocacy,
whether that's philanthropy,
whether that's investments,
because I think all of those things
are needed if we're going to really
advance women to their
rightful place in society.
Leaving the foundation was something that
weighed very heavily on me,
but it became just clear to me that the US
was changing very rapidly before our eyes,
that women's rights were being
rolled back and that I had a lot of
work ahead of me that I wanted to do
on that and to use my voice behind.
I mean, you were high
school valedictorian.
You were the only woman in
your class at Microsoft.
You impressed one of the
smartest men in the world,
and yet you still at times
felt like an imposter.
Is there something that you
say to yourself to psych
yourself up in the morning?
I want to say it with you because
so many super successful women
still feel that way.
I think we have to look at the
root of why we feel that way.
Society is constantly telling
us otherwise in so many
places. We walk in and
there's no one else like us,
or you don't see somebody who's
a role model ahead of you,
or you are literally told
you don't belong here,
or you sit at a table and
people all talk over you.
So society gives us these messages
and we do have to push back on them.
So when I have doubt, I
remind myself, don't be quiet.
If I start to feel like
I want to be quiet,
I have to think about what happened
that made me feel that way,
and remember that's often about
somebody else, not about me.
At Pivotal, she's centering on
the needs of women and girls,
committing $1 billion towards
advancing the power of women globally.
Women do things differently as we've
been discussing. Mackenzie Scott,
I'm curious what you think
of her style of giving.
She's known for this more sort
of no strings attached approach,
whereas the Gates Foundation
has historically been more
sort of data-driven and
strategic. What do you think
of her style of giving?
I think it's fantastic for her,
for where she is and what
she wants to accomplish.
She is living her values out in society.
She's not just giving to
any organization out there.
She's giving to organizations that
she thinks are changing society and
who are effective, and I think
that's phenomenal. Good for her.
I wish more people would put
their money where their mouth is.
I know you're friends with her. I'm
curious how she's influenced you.
Did you reach out to her as you were
trying to figure out how to leave your
marriage and then the foundation?
I would say probably the last eight
years we formed even more of a
friendship. She's had a little more time
as some of her kids go off to college,
so have I,
and so we have just a really nice candid,
supportive friendship.
Women are actually coming
into a lot more money.
How could that change society?
I think it will change
society fundamentally,
especially if women control the money
and can spend it the way they want.
When a woman gets an extra
equivalent of a dollar in her hand,
she spends it on her
children and on her family,
and she spends it on
medications for her children.
So women make different
investments versus men.
I also think when women
control more resources,
they will fund other women's businesses.
Is there a group power Women chat
with you and Mackenzie and Laurene and
Priscilla?
Do you trade notes about
how to navigate this life?
Absolutely, but I've even
in the last two years,
especially after I saw what's happened
to women's rights in this country,
I've reached out to friends of friends
that I never would've known before,
even in Silicon Valley and have gone and
had a number of coffees and teas to try
and get their perspective of what's
going on. Where are you investing?
How are you thinking about our democracy?
Melinda's new endeavor coincides with
seismic changes in the US government.
Her life's work is facing huge
setbacks under a new administration.
Our golden age has just begun.
President yesterday talked about the
DOGE's strategy for cutting the federal
workforce at large.
The new Trump administration has all been
eliminated the world's leading global
aid agency and frozen spending or try
to on thousands of federal programs
including vital scientific
and medical research.
How is President Trump and these actions,
how is this impacting
the philanthropic world?
The cuts in USAID alone,
16.9 million women will
not get maternal health
services.
People are going hungry because
of those cuts as Americans.
Is that what we want?
Do we want to create more crises around
the world or do we want peace and
prosperity for others so
they can live where they are?
Philanthropy can take a risk that we
wouldn't want government to take with our
taxpayer funding,
but it can prove things out at scale
and then governments can come in
to scale that up.
Elon Musk and DOGE, how
do you feel about one man,
a billionaire having that much independent
power within the federal government?
Well, it's unprecedented to
have anyone come in and say,
we're just going to wipe it out like
that. That makes no sense to me.
President Trump handed more power
over to Elon Musk yesterday,
giving the billionaire and
his team oversight over
hiring decisions across every
government agency.
We have never in American
history seen a lineup of business
tycoons occupying a place of honor
at a presidential inauguration.
What do you make of the tech billionaires
lining up behind President Trump and
Silicon Valley's right turn?
What I have seen in the last six
to months to a year is many people
who used to say one thing have
absolutely shifted over here, look,
a democracy is made up by our
beliefs and our investments
and our values,
and of all times right now should
be living those values out,
not pivoting to what some comms person
tells us is the right thing to do. Right?
That would be ridiculous.
The rollback of DEI, how's that going
to be written in the history books?
Not favorably. Again, you
have to look at society.
Who's in society right now and does our
democracy do our state legislatures and
does our Senate and does our
Congress look like society?
And the answer is no.
The reason you need to have all
of society represented in the
legislature in any governing body
is because they make good policy
based on their lived experience.
As DEI initiatives are slashed,
Melinda is trying to fill the gaps.
Pivotal has earmarked $150 million to
put towards equity and inclusion in the
workplace, specifically the tech
industry. It's estimated that by 2030,
86% of businesses will
be transformed by AI.
As protections for women are
rolled back around the globe,
Melinda wants to ensure their seat
at the table. The make men great
again movement. What's your take on that?
I don't ever like anything that pits
women versus men or men versus women.
That's not healthy for.
Society.
There's a generation of boys coming up
that statistics show are less likely to
go to college, are more
likely to feel alone,
feel their opportunities
are slipping away.
What do you think is going on
there and what can we do about it?
Well, I think we need to make
investments in those boys.
They need more role models.
It can be a good coach,
it can be a teacher at school,
but we need to come together and really
deeply understand what's going on with
our boys. There's been
some good research on this,
but further I think needs to be done.
The truth is there are many great men in
society and there are many great women
in society.
We need to support both so that they
both get to where they want to be
in society and can thrive.
What advice are you giving your son?
Keep going. Keep doing what you're doing.
He has always believed in women's rights.
He also helps keep me
educated, sending me articles.
Have you considered this? Think
about this other point of view, mom,
I know this is your point of view,
but think about this other one.
You talk about not needing to be a
perfect parent, but a good enough parent.
Can you explain that?
It's a concept I didn't learn until my
kids were in middle school ages and I
wish I had learned earlier.
I'd always been this perfectionist
and that's not always a good thing,
especially as you're a mom.
And so when I finally learned this
concept of that children need one
good enough parent and
they're going to be okay,
I could let my guard down because there
is no such thing as a perfect parent.
I thought why am certainly a
good enough parent? These kids,
they're going to be okay.
I appreciate that you're
still speaking up about women.
It does seem like the conversation
about women making strides has gone very
quiet.
I don't think the voices are gone,
but sometimes when you are
strategizing and you're figuring out
where you go next,
geopolitically things have changed
massively in the last few months
massively.
So how we strategize and where
we make investments and where
we use our voices, just
give a little time.
I hope you're right. I hope you're right.
The best answer is not
always the quickest answer.
So it's not always first mover or
first speaker that has the advantage.
Sometimes it's the person
who quietly strategizes.
Melinda French Gates 3.0.
What is the next chapter
that hasn't been written?
Who knows? I am so excited.
At least another decade of work
and then we'll see from there.
What's your take on where we're headed?
I don't think any of us know
where we're headed, quite frankly.
We've never had an administration
quite like this one,
and also some of the administrations
now around the world in Europe.
So anybody who tells you they
know exactly where we are headed,
I don't think we do.
Are you optimistic or worried?
I'm concerned is probably
the best way to say it.
I am optimistic when I see
great work still going on in
communities and at the state level,
but when you see certain directives
coming down and things happening so
swiftly,
that's deeply concerning to me
And especially the rollbacks for women.
So for me, my work continues.
I really want to make sure that women can
step into their full power and advance
in society in both the US and globally.
I believe that we need to create a world
and make changes in the world where
women can fully step into
their power. We all have power,
but there are barriers in
society that hold women back.
For a woman to have her full power,
she needs to be able to voice
what she thinks is true,
make her own decisions about
herself and her family,
and have her own resources that she
can decide where and how to spend them.
So do you finally feel
unburdened by what has been?
I feel very much that I can make the
decisions I want to make live the life I
fully want to live and use the resources,
which I believe is to whom much
is given, much is expected,
and so anybody in society who is
unbelievably privileged,
which I am, any of us,
owe the world to give that back and to
give that back thoughtfully for others.
The country's also in
transition right now.
Let's wait for the plane to
transition out of our sky.